In some cases, we are not interested in interpreting the graph structure, we just want to
use it to model correlations and to make predictions. One example of this is in ﬁnancial
portfolio management, where accurate models of the covariance between large numbers of
different stocks is important. Carvalho and West (2007) show that by learning a sparse graph,
and then using this as the basis of a trading strategy, it is possible to outperform (i.e., make
more money than) methods that do not exploit sparse graphs. Another example is predicting
traffic jams on the freeway. Horvitz et al. (2005) describe a deployed system called JamBayes
for predicting traffic ﬂow in the Seattle area; predictions are made using a graphical model
whose structure was learned from data.


1.3.4 Matrix completion

Sometimes we have missing data, that is, variables whose values are unknown. For example, we
might have conducted a survey, and some people might not have answered certain questions.
Or we might have various sensors, some of which fail. The corresponding design matrix will
then have “holes” in it; these missing entries are often represented by NaN, which stands for
“not a number”. The goal of imputation is to infer plausible values for the missing entries. This
is sometimes called matrix completion. Below we give some example applications.

1.3.4.1

Image inpainting

An interesting example of an imputation-like task is known as image inpainting. The goal is
to “ﬁll in” holes (e.g., due to scratches or occlusions) in an image with realistic texture. This is
illustrated in Figure 1.12, where we denoise the image, as well as impute the pixels hidden behind
the occlusion. This can be tackled by building a joint probability model of the pixels, given a
set of clean images, and then inferring the unknown variables (pixels) given the known variables
(pixels). This is somewhat like masket basket analysis, except the data is real-valued and spatially
structured, so the kinds of probability models we use are quite different. See Sections 19.6.2.7
and 13.8.4 for some possible choices.

1.3.4.2

Collaborative ﬁltering

Another interesting example of an imputation-like task is known as collaborative ﬁltering. A
common example of this concerns predicting which movies people will want to watch based
on how they, and other people, have rated movies which they have already seen. The key idea
is that the prediction is not based on features of the movie or user (although it could be), but
merely on a ratings matrix. More precisely, we have a matrix X where X(m, u) is the rating

(say an integer between 1 and 5, where 1 is dislike and 5 is like) by user u of movie m. Note
that most of the entries in X will be missing or unknown, since most users will not have rated
most movies. Hence we only observe a tiny subset of the X matrix, and we want to predict
In particular, for any given user u, we might want to predict which of the
a different subset.
unrated movies he/she is most likely to want to watch.

In order to encourage research in this area, the DVD rental company Netﬂix created a com-
launched in 2006, with a $1M USD prize (see http://netflixprize.com/).
petition,
In
particular, they provided a large matrix of ratings, on a scale of 1 to 5, for ∼ 18k movies
created by ∼ 500k users. The full matrix would have ∼ 9 × 109 entries, but only about 1%
of the entries are observed, so the matrix is extremely sparse. A subset of these are used for
training, and the rest for testing, as shown in Figure 1.13. The goal of the competition was to
predict more accurately than Netﬂix’s existing system. On 21 September 2009, the prize was
awarded to a team of researchers known as “BellKor’s Pragmatic Chaos”. Section 27.6.2 discusses
some of their methodology. Further details on the teams and their methods can be found at
http://www.netflixprize.com/community/viewtopic.php?id=1537.

1.3.4.3 Market basket analysis

In commercial data mining, there is much interest in a task called market basket analysis. The
data consists of a (typically very large but sparse) binary matrix, where each column represents
an item or product, and each row represents a transaction. We set xij = 1 if item j was
purchased on the i’th transaction. Many items are purchased together (e.g., bread and butter),
so there will be correlations amongst the bits. Given a new partially observed bit vector,
representing a subset of items that the consumer has bought, the goal is to predict which other
bits are likely to turn on, representing other items the consumer might be likely to buy. (Unlike
collaborative ﬁltering, we often assume there is no missing data in the training data, since we
know the past shopping behavior of each customer.)

This task arises in other domains besides modeling purchasing patterns. For example, similar
techniques can be used to model dependencies between ﬁles in complex software systems. In
this case, the task is to predict, given a subset of ﬁles that have been changed, which other ones
need to be updated to ensure consistency (see e.g., (Hu et al. 2010)).

It is common to solve such tasks using frequent itemset mining, which create association
rules (see e.g., (Hastie et al. 2009, sec 14.2) for details). Alternatively, we can adopt a probabilistic
approach, and ﬁt a joint density model p(x1, . . . , xD) to the bit vectors, see e.g., (Hu et al.

(a) Illustration of a K-nearest neighbors classiﬁer in 2d for K = 3. The 3 nearest neighbors
Figure 1.14
of test point x1 have labels 1, 1 and 0, so we predict p(y = 1|x1, D, K = 3) = 2/3. The 3 nearest
neighbors of test point x2 have labels 0, 0, and 0, so we predict p(y = 1|x2, D, K = 3) = 0/3.
(b)
Illustration of the Voronoi tesselation induced by 1-NN. Based on Figure 4.13 of (Duda et al. 2001). Figure
generated by knnVoronoi.

2010). Such models often have better predictive acccuracy than association rules, although they
may be less interpretible. This is typical of the difference between data mining and machine
learning: in data mining, there is more emphasis on interpretable models, whereas in machine
learning, there is more emphasis on accurate models.

1.4

Some basic concepts in machine learning

In this Section, we provide an introduction to some key ideas in machine learning. We will
expand on these concepts later in the book, but we introduce them brieﬂy here, to give a ﬂavor
of things to come.

